As “the guardian of the genome”, p53 has received significant attention for monitoring genome integrity and regulating DNA repair. More than half of human cancers have been shown to express at least a mutant version of p53. Reconstitution of a functional p53 network is an attractive anti-cancer strategy, but therapeutic strategies to restore function have been limited to p53 and its nearest neighbors. Strategies have focused on changing the function of mutant p53, through proteasome- or autophagy-mediated degradation of mutant p53, conversion of mutant p53 to wild-type p53, inhibiting either MDM2 transcription or MDM2-mediated degradation of p53, and to a much lesser extent, interference in the signaling pathways downstream of p53. Considering the centrality of p53 and its prevalence in cancer, the availability of therapeutic approaches is disappointing. A class of post-transcriptional regulators, termed microRNAs (miRNAs), is directly associated with p53, either by regulating or being regulated by p53 and its partners. This network plays a crucial role in fine-tuning the p53 response and maintaining homeostasis in normal cellular processes and stress conditions (1–5).

We are specifically interested in miR-34a networks. miR-34a loss, driven by mutant p53, has been observed in a wide range of solid and hematological malignancies, including cancers of the lung, prostate, breast, pancreas, colon, kidney, bladder, skin, and brain (3,5–11). Replacement therapy based on delivery of miR-34a has been shown to have anti-oncogenic activity: Antagonizing cancer cell viability, stemness, metastasis and drug resistance, miR-34a showed broad applicability, robust therapeutic efficacy, and significant synergy in both in vitro studies and in preclinical evaluations (5,7,8,12–17). While many studies have sought to explain the action of miR-34a, the specific targets of miR-34a that mediate its anti-oncogenic function and the degree to which those targets collaborate or antagonize to achieve the observed phenotypes remain largely unknown. Here we aim to unravel the impact of these connections.

A “perturbed” network, such as one with p53 mutations, or in our case mutations in miR-34-related programs, disrupts the normal homeostatic control mechanisms. This can lead to abnormal cellular responses, loss of regulation, and increased sensitivity to external cues, impacting the overall stability and functionality of the network. We believe that understanding these miR-34a targeted networks/programs will open the path to future approaches that adjust homeostasis therapeutically (e.g., gene therapy, small molecules, network rewiring, combinatorial therapies) or exploit them through synthetic lethality. Arguably of more immediate significance will be developing strategies for personalized medicine. Analyzing the specific characteristics of an individual's genomic information, such as the type of mutation and associated network alterations, can guide the selection of targeted therapies tailored to the patient's unique genetic profile.

Combining experimental and computational approaches, our team is well-positioned to perform the proposed aims. Specifically, we combine expertise in genome editing/systems biology (Bleris), microRNA/cancer biology (Pertsemlidis). Our team has a history of studying theoretical and experimental aspects of miRNA networks (18–20) and miRNA cancer biology/therapeutics (21,22). We also have extensive experience combining theory and experiments towards bottom-up characterization of networks (Molecular Systems Biology (23,24)) and top-down reverse engineering approaches (PNAS and ACS Synthetic Biology (25,26)). We believe that the integration of genome editing technologies and systems biology can redefine our understanding of mutant p53 homeostasis and will shed new light on the functional roles of miR-34a in tumor suppression and cancer development.

We propose to dissect miR-34a interaction networks using state-of-the-art genome editing, single-cell sequencing and thorough characterization methodologies. By studying the functional consequences of genetic modifications, we will gain insights into how these alterations affect cellular homeostasis. We will identify the specific interactions in which miR-34a participates that mediate its anti-oncogenic function and the degree to which the weights of those interactions collaborate or antagonize to achieve the observed phenotypes.

More specifically, we aim to harness the therapeutic benefits of miR-34a replacement therapy, particularly focusing on identifying critical mediators of miR-34a function (i.e., downstream targets). Importantly, our approach bypasses any liabilities associated with blunt miR-34a mimic delivery. These issues include off-target effects and delivery vehicle-mediated toxicities that previously hindered efforts to translate miR-34a replacement into clinical reality. The proposed experiments will elucidate and rank the significance of miR-34a-related programs, an inherently novel direction with the potential to yield new therapeutic opportunities.

Today we have the unprecedented opportunity to modify individual cells and pathways with single-nucleotide specificity and collect measurements at single-cell resolution. The first aim will dissect a specific miRNA pathway using genome editing. The resulting panel of edited monoclonal cell lines will allow us (Aim 3) to study the impact of network modifications in longitudinal studies, also involving therapeutic interventions followed by characterization of genetic and epigenetic cellular landscapes.

The determinants of miRNA interaction with their targets have largely been agreed on for the past decade. Canonical binding is mediated by complementarity between the seed region of the miRNA (nucleotides 2-8, counting from the 5’ end) and target sequences in mRNAs. The relative expression of both miRNAs and targets, the number of target sites, and the expression of decoy sequences are all relevant determinants that are seldom considered. Our experiments will provide novel insights in this topic.

Considering a miRNA network (Figure 1a), we propose to compare the standard approach of inhibiting a miRNA (Figure 1b) with surgically removing miRNA targets (Figure 1c) in a combinatorial manner (i.e., in the case of 3 target genes, 23 = 8 cell lines). We will assess the impact of increasing and/or decreasing the affinity of selected miRNAs to their targets (Figure 1d), again by custom genome editing. Both experiments are novel in studying the role of miRNAs in biological networks.

Figure 1: Specific interventions to dissect a miRNA network. (a) Wild type network with a transcription factor (TF) activating a microRNA (miR) and its downstream targets (x,y,z). (b) Typical experiment with use of microRNA inhibitor resulting in complete loss of all downstream edges. (c) Editing to remove the miR targets of an individual gene (i.e., x) resulting in the loss of the miR-to-x regulatory edge. (d) Editing to increase or decrease the binding affinity of the microRNA for its targets by replacing the target sites in the corresponding genes.

The second aim scales up these experiments to include multiple miR-34a pathways/programs using a custom, high-throughput strategy to edit target sites and distinguish between invariant network properties and those that are cell line- and context-dependent. Again, these experiments break new ground in using custom screens to probe well-defined p53-dependent programs (e.g., EMT, cell cycle, apoptosis). Aims 1 and 2 are distinct: the objectives are different, and the aims are not dependent. Aim 1 reveals how parts of the p53-miRNA behave under perturbation, while Aim 2 identifies network modifications that represent new vulnerabilities or opportunities in defined biological programs. Finally, Aim 3 focuses on the characterization of the edited clones and screen results. We will produce radar charts that show multivariate data of three or more quantitative properties mapped onto an axis. To interrogate miRNA regulation at the single-cell level, we will adopt the half-cell genomics approach to generate single-cell miRNA-mRNA co-sequencing expression profiles. We propose testable hypotheses based on graph theory to probe the function of miR-34a controlling the overall activity of regulatory programs.

Discovered in 1979, p53 was the first tumor suppressor to be identified (27). Since then, p53 has been shown to play a crucial role in maintaining genomic stability (28), with more than 50% of human cancers harboring mutant or deleted p53 (29). Under normal conditions, the p53 protein exists in a latent form and at low concentration. In response to various cellular stress signals such as DNA damage, hypoxia, and oncogene expression, p53 is switched on. Numerous post-translational modifications of p53 triggered by stress signals lead to the cellular accumulation of p53 protein, which operates as a transcription factor, regulating a wide spectrum of genes. The cellular functions triggered by p53 response are surprisingly heterogeneous depending on cell type, environmental context and the type and/or degree of stress. Nevertheless, all p53-induced functions are tumor suppressive through prevention of proliferation and cell cycle progression of damaged and mutant cells (30). As most human malignancies shut down the p53 tumor-suppressing responses, p53 is one of the most promising targets for drug interventions in cancer therapy.

MicroRNAs, in their mature forms, are small non-coding RNAs approximately 22 nucleotides in length, that act as major regulators of gene expression in cells, in some contexts as binary switches (leading to complete silencing of their targets) and in others as fine-tuning regulators. Since miRNAs are involved in critical cellular processes such as growth, differentiation, apoptosis, and overall gene regulation, the loss of critical miRNAs in a given cell type often has significant implications for cell fate (31,32).

p53 and miRNAs have an intricate relationship that plays a crucial role in the regulation of various cellular processes. p53 acts as a transcription factor and can directly regulate the expression of several miRNAs, such as miR-34a, miR-145, and the miR-200 family. When p53 is activated in response to cellular stress or DNA damage, it binds to specific sequences in the regulatory regions of these miRNAs, leading to their upregulation. Thereby, aberrant p53 function impacts directly the expression and activity of miRNAs, contributing to tumor development and progression. In turn, p53 is also regulated directly by numerous miRNAs.

In the p53/miRNA network, network edges are regulatory interactions between miRNAs and target mRNAs, interactions that are mediated by sequence complementarity and therefore susceptible to genetic variation. Variation in miRNA binding sites has been associated with numerous diseases, including Tourette Syndrome (33), rheumatoid arthritis (34), lupus (35), psoriasis (36), Crohn’s disease (37,38), Parkinson’s disease (39), hypertension (40,41), diabetes and obesity (42,43), and multiple cancers. In the context of lung cancer (44), rs1126579 disrupts the miR-516a-3p binding site in the 3’UTR of CXCR2 and is associated with reduced risk, while LCS6 alters the let-7 binding site in the 3’UTR of KRAS and is associated with increased risk (45). Additional studies have demonstrated associations between genetic variation and lung cancer through similar mechanisms including miR-335:BIRC5 (46), miR-1827:MYCL1 (47), miR-651:FAS (48).

In the narrower context of p53 signaling (49), miR-34a regulates MDM4, a strong repressor of p53, creating a positive feedback loop in which high levels of miR-34a repress MDM4, de-repressing p53 and driving higher miR-34a expression. Notably, lung adenocarcinomas can express a short form of MDM4 lacking the miR-34a target sites in the 3’UTR and thereby evade the functional consequences of the positive feedback loop.

From a clinical perspective, the numerous ways miRNAs can participate in regulatory networks suggest that dysregulation of miRNA expression and variation in miRNA target sites might underlie the pathogenesis of numerous human diseases (particularly cancer). Studies have revealed extensive crosstalk between the p53 network and miRNAs (12,13), but the specifics of the participation of miRNAs in the regulation of the complex p53 signaling pathway and their contribution to the role of p53 in tumor suppression remain largely elusive.

To comprehensively investigate the question of clinical relevance of mutations in miRNA target sites in the p53 network, we took the set of genes and miRNAs known to participate in p53 signaling as network nodes and defined network edges based on validated miRNA target interactions. To assess whether known mutations occur in miRNA target sites in this network, we performed an inner join on genomic intervals (hg19) to merge miRNA target prediction data (from TargetScan Human 5.1, which contains 54,199 predicted interactions) with SNP locations (dbSNP build 147, which contains 153,953,962 RefSNP clusters, of which 89,232,381 are intragenic) using bedtools and then filtered the results to focus on the p53 signaling network. We identified 37 SNPs that occur in miRNA target sites in the p53 network. While at least one has been associated with disease: rs45474992 has been shown to be protective against non-Hodgkin lymphoma (50), the others, perhaps not surprisingly, have received little attention and their functional consequences are not known.

We previously used the breast cancer cell line MCF7 to experimentally probe the effect of abrogation of miRNA function (18). We used a cell line containing a stably-integrated fluorescent reporter (Venus) fused to the p53 cDNA (51,52), and showed oscillations in p53 levels under induction of DNA damage (51). We studied three miRNA-mediated autoregulatory loops of p53 (1); miR-34a, miR-29a and miR-192 are activated by p53 and in turn inhibit the p53-antagonizing effect of MDM2. We performed two independent time-lapse experiments to test the following conditions: no transfection, transfection with a negative control oligonucleotide, and transfection with selected miRNA inhibitors (Figure 2 contains the data for miR-192).

The oscillations of p53 protein after addition of the miRNA inhibitors and neocarzinostatin (NCS) were captured using time-lapse microscopy (Figure 2a). To evaluate the impact of the miRNA perturbations on the stress-induced p53 oscillations, we analyzed one hundred single-cell trajectories of p53 fluorescence profiles after artificially induced DNA damage. We found that the targeted miRNA suppression has little qualitative effect on the period or amplitude of the oscillations (18), and that the cells transfected with the miR-192 inhibitor show a markedly decreased number of p53 oscillating cells compared to wild type (Figure 2b).

We also assessed the impact of miR-34a over-expression in HCT116p53wt and HCT116p53-/- cells (19,53). Specifically, we introduced miRNA mimics and quantified their impact on cell cycle progression and apoptosis induction (19). In terms of the cell cycle, miR-34a showed a substantial and p53-dependent increase in the sub-G1 (apoptotic) population of DNA content as measured by staining with propidium iodide (PI). We measured apoptosis by staining with Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated to the phosphatidylserine (PS)-binding antibody Annexin V and PI (54,55). In the late stages of apoptosis, the integrity of the cell membrane becomes significantly compromised and PI, usually impermeable to the cell membrane, becomes internalized and intercalates between nucleic acids, and thus can differentiate and quantify early and late apoptotic populations. miR-34a mimic-treated cells increase in both apoptotic populations (Figure 3).

Our results (18,19,53) demonstrate that perturbing a network node is a blunt tool. The introduction of a miRNA inhibitor abolishes all network edges specific to that miRNA leaving its targets post-transcriptionally unregulated or de-repressed. Similarly, miRNA mimics strengthen all network edges specific to that miRNA, causing global knockdown of target genes. With our experiments, we were able to quantify the resulting change in cellular phenotype, but the underlying reasons warrant additional investigation and motivate the proposed effort. In the proposed work, we will use custom genome editing tools to perform combinatorial and high-throughput modifications of miR-34a networks in a panel of cell lines, develop the corresponding framework to understand the results, and generally elucidate the role of network edges on the stability of mutant p53 pathways.

Strategies to ensure a robust and unbiased approach: (a) Experimental results will be shared in cloud storage accessible by the PI labs. (b) Major experiments will be performed by the PI labs independently to ensure robustness and reproducibility. (c) Data will be analyzed independently to ensure unbiased analysis and interpretation.

The overarching goal of Aim 1 is to edit key miR-34a target sites in a focused yet combinatorial manner. In particular we focus on: Notch, c-Myc, Bcl-2, Sirt1, CDK4, CDK6, SNAI1, Mdm4, Axl, and YY1. We will use genome editing to either surgically remove miRNA target sites or modulate their strength. We will produce a set of monoclonal cell lines each missing one or more network edges relative to the parent line, in a combinatorial manner. We will quantify both the immediate and long-term impact of the edits on cellular phenotypes. The characterization of modified clones and their properties is described in Section 3.1 in detail.

For these investigations, we will employ cell lines that are representative of wild-type, mutant and null forms of p53, with correspondingly different network topologies, in two common cancers. Lung cancer and colorectal cancer are the first and second leading causes of cancer-related deaths in the United States. More than half of all such cancers carry mutations in p53; these are associated with worse survival and poor response to chemotherapy. In cell lines, both the p53 null and the p53 mutant models recapitulate (in combination with mutant KRAS) the tumor progression and metastatic phenotypes observed in patients. We have shown that changes in miRNA expression are required for the full invasive and metastatic phenotype in lung cancer (22,58) . Here we leverage an isogenic pair of normal (HBEC30-KT) and NSCLC (HCC4017) cell lines and a widely used cell line model of colon cancer, HCT116, that has both p53 wild-type and p53 null forms. This panel of cell lines provides isogenic pairs differing only in p53 status as a testbed for perturbations of the p53 network.

Rounding out our panel will be cell lines from the “p53 Hotspot Mutation Cell Panel” (ATCC). We will initially focus on four p53 hotspot mutation-containing cell lines: COLO 320DM (R248W, colon cancer), WiDr (R273H, colon cancer), NCI-H1770 (R248W, NSCLC), and NCI-H1975 (R273H, NSCLC). These cell lines have been characterized for morphology, cellular localization of p53, and p53-target gene expression changes in response to DNA damage. Other commonly observed p53 mutation-related phenotypes include resistance to apoptosis and increased proliferation. We hope to experiment with additional cancer types (importantly with mutations that include R248W and R273H) later in the project. These include HCC70 (R248Q, breast cancer), MDA-MB-468 (R273H, breast cancer), and PANC-1 (R273H, pancreatic cancer).

miR-34a is an anti-oncogenic miRNA that acts as a tumor suppressor by silencing key regulatory genes. An excellent review on miR-34a (59) summarizes on the molecular mechanisms of miR-34a-mediated tumor suppression, with emphasis on the main miR-34a targets. This review provides the targets for all target genes and delineates their association with apoptosis, inhibition of proliferation, cell cycle arrest, inhibition of migration, inhibition of invasion, and finally inhibition of differentiation.

For example, miR-34a-induced cell cycle arrest has been attributed to key cell cycle regulators such as CDK4 (2), CDK6 (5), and CCNE2 (5). Additionally, the apoptotic effects associated with ectopic expression of miR-34a have been attributed to the inhibition of key p53 inhibitors such as Sirt1 (4) and YY1 (60). As illustrated in Table 1, we provide a set of experimentally validated genes targeted by miR-34a that have a PAM sequence near the miRNA target site. Notably, the miR-34a target sites are ideal for genome editing as miR-34a contains the SpCas9 canonical PAM site in the seed sequence.

Consider for example the miR-34 targets sites of SNAI1. As illustrated in Figure 4, miR-34 has a single (verified) target in the 3’UTR of SNAI1. By directing CRISPR to the 3’UTRs of target genes we will modify the native loci by NHEJ-mediated DNA repair, HR-based editing, or directly Cas12a base editing.

To completely abolish a particular miRNA target site we will deliver guide RNAs to target the seed sequence and rely on non-homologous end joining (NHEJ)-mediated DNA repair at the site of Cas9-mediated DNA cleavage (61). By targeting Cas9 to the 3’UTRs of specific miRNA target genes we will abolish the native target sites by NHEJ-mediated DNA repair and quantify the effects of such edge edits at the phenotypic level.

Homology directed repair (HDR) will also allow us to modify large fragments in the 3’UTR, thereby allowing us to change multiple target sites in a single editing round. Here, the cassette of interest together with a puromycin resistance gene, will be separated by a cHS4 insulator and cloned between the two arms (0.5-1kb sequences homologous to the editing site) of a donor plasmid. Upon CRISPR treatment and puromycin selection, the double stranded breaks are repaired through HDR, which integrates the cassette of interest into the desired site. Finally, the puromycin gene will be flanked by flippase target sites and will be removed.

We may also perform base editing of the microRNA targets to modify the sequences. The BE3 base editor operates by utilizing a nickase Cas9 protein (we have experience with the nxCas9(3.7) with broadened PAM compatibility) targeting the DNA coding strand fused to both a cytosine deaminating enzyme (APOBEC) and a uracil DNA glycosylase inhibitor. The Cas9 protein binds the DNA and displaces the non-coding stand of DNA as it binds the coding strand. This strand displacement allows the deaminating enzyme (APOBEC) access to cytosine residues located within the bubble (~1st-11th nucleotide from the 5’ end). Given that uracil deamination is a common occurrence, the fusion of the uracil DNA glycosylase inhibitor prevents the conversion back to cytosine. Additionally, the nicking of DNA encourages DNA repair such that it replaces the hydrogen binding partner of the targeted cytosine (now uracil) with an adenine residue. Ultimately, the new adenine residue replaces the previous guanine residue and the uracil is replaced with a thymidine residue via DNA repair or replication.

We have extensive experience with producing single nucleotide and large scale modifications using CRISPR (19,62). For example, as shown in Figure 5a, we removed the miR-34a target site from the BCL2 locus. We prepared a single sgRNA construct designed against the BCL2 3’UTR and established a polyclonal HCT116 cell line. Sequencing of PCR products spanning the sgRNA target site showed that NHEJ-mediated edits (indels) occurred immediately upstream of the PAM. The next step is to isolate and establish individual cells carrying a single modification. The differences in monoclonal cells will give us different edge weights.

Additionally, in preliminary experiments with base editors, we co-transfected HEK293 cells with mKate2 and CFP reporter plasmids along with either xCas9(3.7)-BE3, dCas9-KRAB-MeCP2, or catalytically active Cas9, and sgRNAs (Figure 5b). Two sgRNAs targeted the ORF of mKate2 and introduced a single base modification that produces a premature stop codon. 48 hours post-transfection cells were harvested and subjected to flow cytometry quantification (Figure 5c). The results show that all base editors substantially decreased mKate2 expression compared to control plasmids that did not receive CRISPR proteins. We note that not only is generating stop codons from the tryptophan codon capable of decreasing mKate2 expression, but the neighboring downstream glutamate (E, GAG) residue is also within the optimal base editing window (4th-8th positioned nucleotide from 5’ end of the spacer sequence) and could also be subject to cytosine deamination resulting in a substitution to lysine (K, AAG or AAA). In general, after base editing, we will confirm the result by sequencing.

Assuming we focus on 3 target genes, we will assess the effects of individual edits in 8 monoclonal cell lines (including the wild-type, Figure 6a) in which the effects of individual edits will be assessed (Figure 6b) and compared to wild-type and control (miRNA mimic/inhibitor experiments). For example, removing all edges (edit 111 in Figure 6) will approach the miRNA inhibitor experiment. If it does not, the interpretation will be that there are other edges from the miRNA that are critical for the phenotype.

Finally, we will assess the impact of increasing and/or decreasing the affinity of selected miRNAs to their targets. To modify the degree of complementarity between the mRNA target sites and the corresponding miRNAs, we will deliver a donor sequence that contains a synthetic miRNA target to allow for homology directed repair (HDR) (63,64) or microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ) replacement (65,66) of the endogenous target site. Specifically, we will modify the miRNA target sites using HDR or MMEJ with a donor sequence containing modifications that are expected to reduce or increase miRNA affinity. We will also perform base editing of the miRNA targets to modify the sequences.

We have extensive experience with genome editing tools (67–70) and have performed single-nucleotide level modifications (62). We will utilize a catalytically active high-fidelity Cas9 (71) for targeted gene editing to disrupt p53-related miRNAs target sites on key regulatory genes involved in p53-mediated apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. By targeting Cas9 to the 3’UTRs of specific miRNA target genes we will abolish the native target sites by NHEJ-mediated DNA repair and quantify the effects of such edge edits at the phenotypic level through cell cycle progression and degree of apoptosis. We argue that the proposed combinatorial gene editing can help further elucidate the key gene activities that are responsible for observed changes in phenotype. We will also utilize custom dCas9 systems engineered to activate or repress the endogenous miRNAs (67).

To ensure robust clonal behavior, upon Cas9-mediated editing of the miRNA target sites, several (>3) monoclonal stable cell lines for each experiment will be established by sorting and limiting dilution. Once the monoclonal cell lines have been expanded, genomic sequencing of targeted locations will reveal the targeting efficiency and the degree of miRNA target site editing. Additionally, potential off-targeting DNA cleavage will be analyzed thoroughly in monoclonal edited cell lines via T7 (Surveyor) assay for the highest predicted off-target sites and/or GUIDE-Seq analysis (72).

The overarching goal of Aim 2 is to develop a customized Cas-based screen for high-throughput, combinatorial editing of network edges using pooled assays. In contrast to Aim 1 where we are interested in the local topological p53/miRNA network, here we aim to identify broader miR-34a-target modifications that represent new vulnerabilities and lead to phenotype changes. We will quantify both the immediate and long-term impact of the edits on cellular phenotypes.

CRISPR-based genomic screening (73–75) is being increasingly used to identify key factors in signaling pathways and biological processes. Briefly, the Cas9 nuclease and a pool of single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) are stably integrated into host cells such that each cell receives a single sgRNA. Here, we propose to use CRISPR-based screening for high-throughput editing of miRNA target sites, the disruption of which could abolish or mitigate the physiological effects of the miRNA-based edge.

As discussed above, a recent review (59) summarizes the main miR-34a-related programs associated with apoptosis, inhibition of proliferation, cell cycle arrest, inhibition of migration, inhibition of invasion, and finally inhibition of differentiation. We will focus on the three major miR-34a-related programs (Figure 7) associated with EMT, cell cycle, and apoptosis. Key gene targets will be identified using miRTarBase, which reports validated interactions between miRNAs and target mRNAs and the methods by which they were validated. Only targets which are validated by three independent techniques (e.g., reporter assay, western blot, qRT-PCR) will be considered. Subsequently, the 3’UTRs of candidate genes will be used to identify potentially editable miRNA target sites in custom in vitro experiments; up to 3 potential target sites (in the same 3’UTR) will be identified for each gene. Finally, these sequences and their immediate upstream and downstream regions will be scanned for suitable sgRNA-based editing.

CRISPR-based plasmid libraries will be prepared using the LentiCRISPRv2 system (74,76). Briefly, for each of the sgRNA targets, a pair of oligonucleotides will be annealed. The annealed pairs will then be pooled and cloned into the LentiCRISPRv2 vector using the BsmBI restriction enzyme. Sufficient clones (>3 times library complexity) will be collected to ensure coverage of the library (Figure 8a). Subsequently, lentiviral library vectors will be prepared by co-transfecting the plasmid libraries with pMD2-VSVG and psPAX2 plasmids into HEK293T cells. Finally, the cell line of interest will be infected at a low MOI (~ 0.1) and subjected to 2 weeks of selection with puromycin to generate the stable cell line screening libraries (Figure 8b). The libraries will be subjected to different stimuli and genomic DNA will be harvested. Subsequently, the sgRNA transcripts will be recovered by PCR and the purified amplicon products will be sequenced by NGS.

We recently published the first demonstration of screen-based microRNA target editing (19). Specifically, sgRNA constructs were designed to disrupt 93 miRNA target sites. Gene targets of miR-34a, miR-145, miR-192, miR-194 and miR-215, were identified, including SIRT1 and BLC2 for miR-34a, SOX9 and KLF5 for miR-145, RB1, CDC7 and ERCC3 for miR-192, DNMT3A for miR-194, and WNK1 for miR-215. CRISPR-based HCT116p53wt (wild type) and HCT116p53-/- (p53 knockout) stable cell libraries were established and treated with 25 nM miR-34a or negative control miRNA. The relative abundance of each sgRNA target was compared between the miRNA-treated and control-treated samples (Figure 9). Intriguingly, we observed enrichments of anti-apoptotic genes including BCL2 and FOSL1 only in HCT116p53-/- cells, but not in HCT116p53wt cells, implicating indirect p53-mediated mechanisms (19).

We will use already established protocols to isolate clones that impact cell cycle progression (i.e., section on preliminary data using microRNA mimics) and apoptosis (i.e., section 2.1). Briefly, cell cycle analysis involves harvesting the cells, cell fixation and permeabilization in order to allow PI to enter the cell to intercalate between DNA. For control experiments we will use thymidine and nocodazole to arrest cells in the G1/S and G2/M stages of the cell cycle, respectively. Additionally, these drugs can be used for cell synchronization procedures as the drugs can be washed out. We will also use the Dead Cell Apoptosis Kit with Annexin V Alexa Fluor 488 and PI to distinguish live cells from early apoptotic cells, and late apoptotic or dead cells.

Cell-fate determination in terms of epithelial versus mesenchymal phenotype is based on relative concentrations of miRNAs and transcription factors. In general, high levels of miR-34 and miR-200 correspond to the epithelial phenotype, and high levels of SNAI1 and ZEB correspond to the mesenchymal phenotype (77,78). Both TFs repress epithelial-specific gene expression, including E-cadherin (CDH1), a hallmark of the epithelial phenotype, and can also promote the expression of mesenchymal markers such as N-cadherin and vimentin. This core network unit is also known to be important as “a motor of cellular plasticity,” as it is coupled to many key cellular features, including stemness (tumor initiation potential), proliferation, apoptosis, resistance to therapy, and cell-cell communication (79). Different drivers of EMT will be employed, including Gas6 and TGFβ. We will isolate clones with differential EMT responses using flow cytometry sorting techniques.

We have extensive experience assessing EMT states at the population level. For example (Figure 10), a A549 lung carcinoma epithelial cell line was cultured in RPMI-1640 with 10% FBS. To establish the epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes, cells were treated with 10ng/mL of TGFβ for 2 days. DIC imaging shows the A549 cells transition from a cobblestone-like morphology to an elongated spindle shape (Figure 10a), consistent with EMT phenotypes (80). In addition, RT-qPCR and ICC were done on the A549 WT and TGFβ-treated samples to analyze gene expression. Typically, vimentin and N-cadherin are upregulated during EMT while E-cadherin is downregulated (81). qRT-PCR results indicate an increase in vimentin and N-cadherin in the TGFβ samples (Figure 10b). ICC staining also shows an increase in vimentin (red) and a decrease in E-cadherin (green) in the TGFβ sample (Figure 10c).

We do not expect major obstacles in generating the CRISPR-based stable cell line library, as the overall complexity of our library is relatively low, or in executing the screen, as we have already performed and published a similar screen (19). We will minimize the contributions from off-target effects in two ways. Upon selection of the sgRNAs, off-target effects will be carefully surveyed using GUIDE-seq (72,82,83). All sgRNAs that introduce off-target effects will be excluded. In addition, the Cas9 construct will be placed under an inducible promoter so that the long-term accumulation of off-target lesions is eliminated.

miRNAs often act as fine-tuners and mediate their physiological functions through regulation of multiple gene targets. Therefore, it is possible that disruption of multiple gene targets is required in order to induce an observable phenotypic change. To investigate this possibility and study synergistic effects, we will infect the cell lines of interest at various MOIs so that multiple sgRNAs can be introduced into a single cell.

The overarching goal of Aim 3 is to assess the impact of genomic modifications on the miR-34a-mediated programs. The objectives proposed in this aim will proceed in parallel with Aims 1 and 2. Specifically, we will study the resulting clones and characterize the miR-34a-mediated programs in response to perturbations (in comparison to the corresponding cells with p53 wild-type and p53 mutant/null forms). We will perform network reconstruction using bulk RNA-seq and single-cell microRNA-mRNA co-sequencing, assess topological changes, and associate them with clonal phenotypes.

Clones in multi-well plates will be perturbed from their steady state in order to study their dynamic response and steady state properties. The objective is to produce radar charts that show multivariate data of three or more quantitative properties mapped onto an axis (e.g., Figure 12). These charts will allow us to organize the modified clones and wild-type cells by their similarities, differences, and identify outliers. We will use a custom-fluidic setup established in the Bleris lab that allows us to perform well-controlled perturbation and media exchange experiments for prolonged periods of time (i.e., time-lapse experiments lasting 7 days). We will adopt the following experiments that can provide insights into the p53-miR-34a-mediated homeostasis:

Stress induction: We will expose cells to various stress signals that activate the p53 pathway, such as DNA damage, oxidative stress, or oncogene activation. We will use specific stress-inducing agents such as DNA-damaging chemicals (e.g., doxorubicin), radiation, or specific inhibitors targeting p53 regulators. We will compare the p53 wild-type and p53 mutant/null form responses to perturbation.

Molecular analysis: We will utilize miRNA mimic/inhibitors or CRISPR (dCas9) to knock down or overexpress genes of interest (and study loss/gain-of-function effects). We will use fluorescent proteins as nodal outputs (68,84,85) that allow direct microscopy and flow cytometry single-cell measurements. We will quantify mRNA expression levels of miR-34a target genes using qRT-PCR to evaluate downstream responses. To track individual mRNA in cells we will adopt the PrimeFlow (Affymetrix) technology, a proprietary oligonucleotide probe set design and branched DNA (bDNA) signal amplification method to analyze RNA transcripts by flow cytometry. This technology will allow us to rapidly assess mRNA distributions in the cells and under different experimental conditions (e.g., cellular stress, miRNA inhibitor/mimics).

Functional assays: We will assess the functional consequences of the modifications, such as cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, or senescence, using flow cytometry, proliferation assays, or viability assays. Briefly, cells will be harvested at 48, 72, and 96 h post-transfection and then subjected to either cell cycle analysis or apoptosis quantification. We will perform DNA damage and repair assays to evaluate the impact on DNA damage response and genome stability. We will investigate cellular phenotypes associated with p53 dysregulation, such as changes in morphology, migration, or invasive potential.

A central goal in this project will be to characterize interactions among the species in the miR-34a programs, the signs of these interactions (activating or inhibiting) as well as, if possible, their strengths. This is usually achieved through data-driven statistical methods based on correlations. Alternatively, algebraic approaches such as modular response analysis (MRA) can be employed (86–90), or, for different problems, information-theory based algorithms based on measures of mutual information among variables representing the various nodes.

Deriving an understanding of how miR-34a programs are controlled – or how perturbations are translated into phenotypic responses – requires identifying the nodes and edges of the network that performs that translation, in other words the miRNAs, messenger RNAs, and proteins and how they interact. In the not-so-distant past, these networks were painstakingly reconstructed from experiments that probed the function of individual nodes. The past decade has seen the development of multiple approaches that leverage expression measurements acquired by sequencing following a genetic or environmental perturbation to identify regulatory relationships, most based on RNA sequencing of populations of cells, or bulk RNAseq (91–98).

Cell-to-cell heterogeneity reflects both heterogeneity of interaction with neighboring cells and the microenvironment and heterogeneity of miRNA regulation of mRNA targets. Many computational methods have been developed to explore miRNA regulation, but nearly all are based on expression profiles derived from bulk RNA sequencing, and therefore report interactions at the resolution of populations of cells. This averaging process obscures the heterogeneity of miRNA regulation across individual cells within these populations. Fortunately, RNA barcoding methods now allow us to study miRNA regulation at the single-cell level.

To interrogate miRNA regulation at the single-cell level, we will adopt the half-cell genomics approach (99) to generate single-cell miRNA-mRNA co-sequencing expression profiles. In the half-cell genomics method, a single cell lysate is split into two half-cell fractions, with the two fractions subjected to small RNA and large RNA expression profiling, respectively. Wang, et al. however failed to investigate the heterogeneity of single-cell miRNA regulation, instead deriving miRNA:mRNA interaction networks from aggregated expression profiles. miRNA-mRNA co-sequencing remains rare in general, and single-cell datasets tend to include only small numbers of cells, partially due to the lack of robust (single-cell) sequencing methods that can be applied to small and large RNA transcripts at the same time. To address these limitations and derive interaction networks at the single cell level (‘one cell – one network’), we will adopt computational approaches (100,101) to infer cell-specific miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks. We will extend these approaches, first by considering only miRNA:mRNA interactions, second by incorporating predicted miRNA:target interactions, and third by interpolating pseudo-cells by sampling with replacement.

We will experiment with graph theory approaches (102–105) to analyze the miR-34a programs using a combination of RNAseq, single-cell sequencing, and single RNA probe measurements.

For example, one class of graphs models the exchange, or flow, of some quantity within the graph. These graphs, called flow networks, are represented as the quadruplet N(G,s,t,c), where G(V,E) is the standard graph notation which consists of the set of all vertices V and edges E, s and t are the source and sink nodes respectively, and c is the capacity function which assigns a maximum flow limit on each of the edges. Each directed edge( e) ⃗∈E ⃗, or equivalently, each pair of adjacent vertices u and v, has a function f:E ⃗→R called the flow which represents the exchange of a quantity between the two vertices. There are numerous properties of flows and capacities which may offer important insights for biological networks.

A classical result of network flow theory is the so called max-flow min-cut theorem developed by Ford and Fulkerson (102). This theorem states that the sum of all the flows within a network are exactly equal to the sum of the maximum flow limits, or the capacities, of the minimum set of edges which, when removed, disconnect the network. A biological interpretation of the max-flow min-cut theorem would suggest that the maximum amount of proteins being utilized within a network is exactly equal to the flow capacity of a select few special edges. In other words, the summative amount of active proteins produced and utilized within a network can be controlled by simply regulating the flow capacity (i.e. maximal production of a specific collection of genes interactions within that network). Consequently, we hypothesize that the p53-mediated miR-34a expression is a response program executed by cellular stress to control the overall activity of specific modules (Figure 11). By lowering the overall production of proteins of certain sub-regulatory networks within the cell via the miR-34a repression, the cell can utilize the resources freed from the subdued subnetworks to address other critical signaling events. In other words, miR-34a repression could be acting as a system level control mechanism, a conductor that controls the overall activity of subnetwork regulatory modules. The results from Aim 2 will point directly to modification in miR-34a targets that control the cellular response to different stimuli (thereby allowing to prove or refute the max-flow min-cut hypothesis).

In the event that target predictions fall short in their ability to provide candidate network edges, we will employ CLASH (Crosslinking, Ligation, And Sequencing of Hybrids) a method for direct identification of miRNA:target pairs using ligation and sequencing of miRNA-target RNA duplexes associated with human AGO1. Briefly, RNA and protein are cross-linked with UV irradiation, RISC complexes are pulled down with anti-AGO1, the associated interacting RNA molecules are partially hydrolyzed, ligated (which joins miRNAs to their target sequences), reverse transcribed, and sequenced. Chimeric reads mapping to non-contiguous transcriptome sites that represent direct interactions of miRNA with mRNA targets.

To conclude, we propose to dissect miR-34a programs using genome editing, sequencing, and thorough characterization methodologies (Figure 12). By studying the functional consequences of genetic modifications, we will gain insights into how these alterations affect cellular homeostasis. We will identify the specific targets of miR-34a that mediate its function and the degree to which those targets collaborate or antagonize to achieve the observed phenotypes. We believe that understanding these miR-34a programs will open the path to future approaches that adjust homeostasis therapeutically or exploit them through synthetic lethality.
